Towards Clinical Applications of Myotonic Dystrophy Biomarkers
1 Introduction
Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is an autosomal dominant trinucleotide repeat disorder, with DM1-positive patients characterised by abnormally large CTG repeat in a non-coding region of the Dystrophia Myotonica Protein Kinase (DMPK) gene. The length of the repeat is positively correlated with severity of symptoms, which include muscle wasting and myotonia, cardiac conduction defects, cataracts, hypersomnia, abnormal glucose response, as well as premature baldness and testicular atrophy in males (https://doi.org/doi:10.1016/0092-8674(92)90154-5).

Nakamori et al (https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.23992) identified biomarkers of DM1, via high-throughput techniques, in form of 39 genes, whose expression is characterised by dysregulated alternative splicing.

Batra et al (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2014.08.027/) identified 80 genes, whose expression has disrupted Alternative Polyadenylation (APA), reusing the (human) dataset of Nakamori et al. and using other datasets, including data from mouse models.

In this study we evaluate four sets of biomarkers, using previously unpublished data, with the view of eventually applying these biomarkers in the context of evaluating efficacy of emerging DM1 treatments (https://doi.org/10.1124/jpet.115.226969):

All human genes as identified by GENECODE (Appendix A details our selection mechanism).
Genes identified by Nakamori et al.
Genes identified by Batra et al.
A single gene, TNNI1

The following Venn diagram captures membership relationship between these four sets of genes:

TODO make diagram:
TNNI1 belongs to Batra
Batra intersection Nakamori are empty (TODO verify)
Batra, Nakamori belong to GENECODE

The structure of our argument is as follows:

The length of the trinucleotide repeat specific to Myotonic Dystrophy (DM1) leaves a discernible pattern in the mRNA profiles obtained from muscle samples of diseased and healthy patients using a microarray chip.
The strength of the pattern is positively correlated with the length of the repeat.
The pattern can be used to construct a simple statistical model, which can predict the length of the repeat from the mRNA profile significantly better than a random predictor. The quality of prediction is modest, with unoptimised model trained on (TODO 14) patients able to explain only about a fifth of repeat length variance when tested on an independent set of (TODO 13) patients.
We conjecture that the model can serve as a valuable tool in evaluating efficacy of any treatment for DM1 as such treatment enters pre-clinical or clinical trials.

Claim 1 is well-supported in the literature in relation to the muscle tissue. We give an overview of prior work in chapter 2. We present a statistical analysis of a previously unpublished dataset, which further supports this claim in relation to muscle tissue in chapter 3. We attempt to, unsuccessfully, extend this claim to blood tissue.

Claim 2 was not, to the best of our knowledge, formally verified before, but is a natural consequence of accepted and conjectured molecular mechanisms of DM1 pathology. We provide a formal verification of this claim, using statistical analysis of the dataset described in chapter 3.

We demonstrate Claim 3, which is our original contribution, based on the methodology proposed by Lee et al. in the context of Huntington disease. While novel, it is not surprising, and was theorised by others, both in literature and in private correspondence, e.g.:

> Our study indicates that alternative splice events have good potential to function as biomarkers of DM severity and therapeutic response: (1) the analytical precision is good; (2) the mechanism for splicing misregulation is well defined and directly connected to the disease process (RNA toxicity) and therapeutic goal (release of sequestered proteins); (3) many splicing defects are correlated with muscle weakness and some are directly implicated in symptoms of DM133,35,39; and (4) in mouse models, the splicing defects are fully reversible by RNAtargeted therapy.

(https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.23992)

Claim 4 is a natural extension, and the motivation of this line of research, but is outside of the scope of our experiment and cannot be evaluated using our data. We offer a plausible reason to support a belief that our model can perform significantly better in the setting of a pre-clinical or a clinical trial than in the setting of our experiment, as well as a plausible limitation.

We would like to thank the Marigold foundation and EPSRC UK for financing various aspects of this research.

2 Prior high-throughput work on DM1
Our primary reference is the work of Nakamori et al., who identified 42 genes exhibiting splicing defects in DM1. Briefly, their methodology was as follows:
Muscle tissue (patients: 4 biceps, 2 quadriceps, 1 TA, 1 diaphragm; controls: 8 VL) was sampled post-mortem from 8 patients with DM1 and 8 healthy controls.
mRNA was extracted from the samples, purified and hybridized to GeneChip™ Human Exon 1.0 ST microarrays.
Putative alternative splicing defects were identified using a mixture of existing methods, such as Affymetrix's PLIER, DABG and Alternative Transcript Analysis Methods for Exon Arrays, and new methods proposed and described by the authors.
Identified putative defects were validated using RT-PCR in 50 control subjects, yielding 42 genes with confirmed splicing defects.

The authors report several technical obstacles with this approach, with initial version of their pipeline suffering from as many as 80% putative splicing defects failing to replicate with RT-PCR. Further analysis suggested that this occurred when:
"Signal intensity for the entire transcript or a particular exon was low."
"Overall expression of a transcript was strongly up- or down- regulated in DM1 relative to normal controls."
"Signal intensity of an exon was inappropriately high relative to other exons in the same transcript."

Batra et al. re-used the dataset of Nakamori et al. and used similar techniques to filter down the data. APA events of interest were identified by visual inspection of processed data.

> To prioritize candidates for further investigation, probe sets were selected with a >2-fold change in DM1 or DM2 vs. normal controls (p < 0.01 for DM1 vs. normal, p < 0.05 for DM2 vs. normal). Among 858 probe sets selected by these criteria, we eliminated candidates that could result from differences in transcription start site, genes that were represented by ≤5 probe sets, retrogenes and non-protein coding genes leaving 438 probe sets. Among these candidate events, 123 (28%) belonging to 80 genes represented possible alternative 3′ exons or APA sites (Table S5).

> The group of potential APA isoforms (Table S5) was chosen following visual inspection of each candidate on graphs showing signal intensity for all probe sets representing single genes for four groups of samples and localization of differentially expressed exons on RefSeq gene structures (Figures 7 and S5).

TODO is there other work that needs to be surveyed?

TODO should I mentioned Batra's mistake in attributing all muscle groups to VL, whereas original source shows there is a wide selection: 4 biceps, 2 quadriceps, 1 TA, 1 diaphragm, 8 VL?

3 The Dataset
As part of international collaboration we've obtained a dataset from 35 patients, including 31 Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 (DM1) cases and 4 healthy controls. All DM1 cases in this research were heterozygous for the abnormally expanded CTG repeat.

The mode of the length of the allele containing DM1-specific trinucleotide expansion (MAL) was determined by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) of blood DNA for 35/36 patients. One patient refused blood donation.

For each of the 35 blood-donating patients mRNA expression profiling of blood was performed using Affymetrix GeneChip™ Human Exon 1.0 ST microarray.

For 30/36 patients a successful quadriceps biopsy was obtained. The muscle tissue was mRNA profiled using the same type of microarray.

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed on both blood & muscle profiles, and visual inspection was carried out to detect presence of outliers. 0 outliers in the blood batch and 4 outliers in the muscle batch were identified and expression profiling was repeated for these patients. For the analysis we used only the repeated data.

It should be stressed that our dataset differs from the dataset collected by Nakamori et al. in the following ways:
We did not perform confirmatory RT-PCR analyses.
Our dataset includes both blood and muscle tissue samples.
Our sample size is about twice the size of the authors.
We measure modal CUG repeat length from blood and use a previously developed model (TODO cite Cathrine's PhD thesis) to estimate the repeat length at birth.

The dataset is deposited to Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) with accession number (TODO deposit to GEO).
3.1 Affymetrix

The microarray chip we used, Affymetrix GeneChip™ Human Exon 1.0 ST microarray contains over 5 million probes, i.e. short cDNA sequences, which target genomic regions with high specificity.

Each probe in the HuEx chip contains precisely 25 nucleotides. Consequently, genomic regions of interest, which are shorter than 25 nucleotides, for example some of the short exons, are not targeted.

Each continuous section of DNA can be targeted by up to 4 probes. DNA sections targeted by the chip include known and suspected exons in known and suspected genes, as well as non-coding genomic features, including 3' and 5' UTRs, and various other types of transcribed or hypothetically transcribed DNA (miRNA, rRNA, pseudo-genes, etc.).

Probesets are further grouped into transcription clusters, which correspond to the entire genes.
4 Data preparation and analysis

5 Results

7 Conclusion
There are reasons to believe our method would perform well in a clinical setting, blah, blah, blah.

Terminology -> Dysregulation of Alternative Splicing
DM1 as opposed to MD1

Criticism
A source of potential criticism is that muscles of DM1 patients have physiological differences (atrophy, increased fat content), especially when disease is severe. Quite possibly observed changes in AS/APA are partly attributable to these physiological differences in DM1 as opposed to purely biomolecular differences. The structure of this counter-argument would be as follows:

Muscles of DM1 patients have higher fat content than healthy controls.
Muscle samples collected from DM1 patients have higher ratio of intermuscular adipocytes to myocytes.
Adipocytes have different AS/APA profiles than myocytes.
Observed AS/APA changes in the DM1 spectrum are mostly derived from differences in adipocyte/myocyte profile.
As a result, mRNA study of muscle tissue is no more effective (and possibly less effective) than a blinded study based on pathophysiological inspection of the tissue.

This argument can, of course be extended to other physiological changes than increased fat content, and other molecular events than AS/APA.
There are multiple ways to address these concerns:

Alternative designs based on tissue cultures.
Alternative designs based on single-cell next-gen sequencing.
Investigating methods to correct for known "physiological" covariats.
Ruling out big impact of "physiological" differences by careful biomolecular investigation.
Discovering DM1 biomarkers in blood, as opposed to muscle.

Ability to use blood, in particular, would be a major improvement over the state of the art, since muscle sampling was highlighted to be as a "main drawback" (https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.23992). Unfortunately, we were not able to detect such biomarkers, using our data and our statistical methodology.

